SOURCE: Quora
TITLE: What is student life like at UCSD?
URL: https://www.quora.com/What-is-student-life-like-at-UCSD

---

[QUESTION]
What is student life like at UCSD?

---

[COMMENT 1]
Ah, this question is like an invitation down memory lane so…. I will take it!

What a good life it was at UCSD! I lived on campus for 3.5 out of my four years there, and I loved every bit of it! Now, do I have massive regrets about my academic choices….? Hell to the YES! But, that is another story.

I lived in Sixth College (I don't know what it is called now), and was in the dorms my first year there. Everyone called it Camp Snoopy, a both endearing and slightly defamatory term. It is a much older area than, say, Eleanor Roosevelt College or the Village now (which I lived in the Village my last year), but it has its pros and cons like any other spot.

The res life people in Sixth College were very nice, and there were always many activities. The dorm life made for much socializing, but if you didn’t like your roomies or dorm mates, it could get really awkward real fast. I had a rather nice experience, on the whole. I learned many great things from my friends there, and I still reflect on some little and big lessons I acquired there. This was my first year.

The life was…..hectic. I bit off more than I could chew by joining an D2 athletic team and one of the volunteer a cappella groups. Ooh. So busy. And, it was an incredible year with the a cappella group because we got to sing with a Grammy-winning musician, and that was big news for everyone (we were SO excited). Needless to say, if you go in with an open mind and a willingness to set healthy boundaries for yourself, you will definitely have so much access to many different groups, social atmospheres and avenues to pursue personal and professional development. The Greek system occurred to me then as being very healthy and vibrant, and I definitely think it is a great avenue for some people. For myself, I did not think it was a healthy avenue, and I still do not. However, it does emphasize networking, a value I despised in and of itself while at University (I looked at it turning relationships with people into a means to an end; I now feel entirely differently, but only because I once believed this before. Now, I find it so valuable in more ways than one).

My first year, I also took ample advantage of the wonderful scenery. Eucalyptus forests, La Jolla sea air everywhere….. Oh my goodness, the opportunity for health there is INCREDIBLE. Not to mention you are near and apart of one of the best university hospital systems in the country so….take care of yourself! I used to run from my dorm on campus to the beach 2–3 miles away (I was in great shape, so it would be a 7–9 mile run), and later picked up roadbiking along the coast to Carlsbad, and also triathlon training as well. All of these outdoor activities are available to you and are so awesome! I developed too much UV skin damage on my face those few years (lol) so, I am happy I moved away. Wear sunscreen! Besides these outdoor activities, there are ample sports facilities with fun things to do like rock climbing, swimming, recreational gym-going, and lots of intra-mural and fun/easy-going team sports to join. I did each of these at one point, and they were all fun in their own ways. This was after I quit the D2 sport I was doing my first year, and again, they all have their pros and cons.

My second year, I was still deluded into going into medicine, so I did a CRAP ton of studying for physics and organic chemistry. Had I realized what I later did while studying abroad by this time, I imagine I would have been going bat s**t crazy with all the different types of exploring I could have done outside of what I already did do my first year. Regardless, me and Geisel Library developed a romantic relationship (not really…..), and I would spend countless hours there trying to understand how carbonyl groups would attack (go after) nuclei. It’s actually like sex, but that’s a whole other story. Back then, too, you could ride bikes dangerously through the campus. That has changed now with designated paths. I guess it makes sense, but my heart yearns for the screeching-past- pedestrian sfeeling (that’s why I live in a 15 million-person city in China now….It’s everywhere….). This being sophomore year, many others are developing the majors and careers moreso; it’s technically what I was doing, but that was blown outta the water when I studied in Italy my third year. I had good friends, we would drink red wine and talk about guys all the time, so that made life worthwhile and meaningful for me.

Third year— even more studying, cramming, etc. I had lived in La Jolla my summer between sophomore and junior years— I definitely recommend it. It’s good to get a different perspective of the campus. Better yet, if you can intern in a field you like, get some experience, that will be even more worth your while. I went to the nearby beaches, did some volunteering and also took some classes I needed to complete so that I could study abroad, be pre-med and graduate in 4 years. This is when I studied in Rome, as well. UCSD does provide good resources for studying abroad, so I give the school that credit. When I came back from Rome, I took the MCAT, got a 31 on it (which was decently good at the time), and realized so freaking late that I did not want to pay $600K over the course of my life for a career I wasn’t that “into.” It was an economic choice made too late. DON’T DO THAT. Also, if you need good career advice and you don’t plan on becoming a lawyer, a PhD candidate or doctor, don’t go to UCSD either. The career department there sucks if you don’t want those things, and to make sure of that, I went back two years after I graduated and came to that conclusion. I also found out from former career counselors and deans of counseling that they also thought this, too. It’s a disappointment, but, alas, perhaps now I am wrong (hopefully so, for the sake of the students).

Fourth year: this showed me just how much there is to explore on the campus as far as alternative/art stuff. I got to know the Hare Krishnas, explored the Vis Arts department, and did a ton of journaling around campus. It really is a beautiful place. Won’t say much more than that for that year :P.

Some extra tidbits: if you want a car and don’t mind paying for it, get one. I did not have one all my years there and, while I am not upset about it now, I recognize just HOW much having one would have changed my experience, in some ways for the better (and other ways, worse). You can get into and out of the city much easier this way, and that is where some juicy stuff happens. Maybe you can go to TJ, SDSU area, so many places, just to see a different lifestyle or meet other types of people besides the college types.

If you go to SD, you are moving to La Jolla, San Diego, Southern CA, the whole gamut. There is a lot of life there and anywhere, and I sincerely hope you have a great time.

Last, but not least, college is an investment in many different ways. I took it as a personal development investment. I needed to take it as a financial one, but I realize that only now. Please please please see this as a financial investment for your future and if you have to not go for one year, IT IS WORTH IT. Figure out what you want and like before you have to pay to learn about it, and talk to career counselors who are independent of the school as well as those in the career department there, for some extra perspective. There is a website you can go to and find a counselor who could work for you. Here it is:

https://ncda.org/aws/NCDA/pt/sp/home_page

People say they learn so much about themselves in college; I definitely did. But, if you can learn about yourself for much cheaper, I say, do it! And, if you feel regret later, it’ll be fine. A lot of that is FOMO, and many people I talk with who did community college for two years are actually quite happy with their exploration their and final career/college choice.

Good luck, be successful, and have fun!

---

[COMMENT 2]
Dorms are overpacked (3 to a room now). Classes way too crowded. The area in itself is still gorgeous as always, closed to beaches, shopping, higher upscale very clean, always thriving and expanding. Just wish the school stop overcrowding and accepting too many students (not base on their academic merit) because it only contributes to the overcrowding and lack of quality teaching. These students eventually drop out anyways but it takes up a spot to the more qualified individuals. My nieces and nephews just graduated a few years ago from there. They said life at UCSD has change a lot, harder to change majors if not impossible. Professor don’t have the time for students as they once did bc they are constantly busy with research, grants, etc…. My nephew who is finishing dental school right now, and moving into the Ortho programs, couldn’t even get a letter of recommendation from his professors at the time but he was a very passive student.

---

[COMMENT 3]
Hey Court,

I’m not qualified to answer this because I went there too long ago, but I do still coach and to a lesser degree am involved with academics there. Plus, I have a good feel for people.

It is definitely not a party school. It definitely is international! When I went there, my core group of 20 or so friends constituted almost the entire foreign contingent. There are now thousands of foreign students especially Asians. It is laid back and everyone is just so dang nice! In all my years at UCSD, I do not ever remember a fight or even heated argument break out. It is brutally academically competitive… which is a good thing. You are going to get an education after all! A very subtle thing about UCSD that came up with a small gathering with Irwin Jacobs a few months ago is how interdisciplinary UCSD is. I have always thought that and I was happily surprised to here someone of his stature mention it as well. Finally, it is set in one of the world’s natural paradises. If you need a break, you are a 5 minute walk from most dorms to some of the most beautiful coastline in the world. A short walk and a few deep breaths can reset your feeling of being overwhelmed during finals to “I can do this!”… trust me on that one. I worked full time, fenced full time, and still graduated top of my engineering class. I hope this helps. -Jeffrey

---

[COMMENT 4]
Not gonna lie, it's kind of socially dead haha. UCSD is not much of a party school and there aren't that many big events except for the Fall festival and Sun God (some celebrities come and perform at our school; we had Khalid last year and Joji this year). Other than that there isn't much to it- socially wise. However, there are A LOT of clubs and organizations that you can join and I can guarantee you that there is literally a club for everyone. Besides that, everyone is extremely friendly; the environment is very nice also (it's by the beach which is a major plus). Keep in mind though, UCSD is in La Jolla which is a very bougie place so it's kind of like Hollywood mixed with Long Beach (if you live in California you'll know what I'm talking about). Honestly though, UCSD is such an amazing school (very chill and laid back), I will admit though it's full of VERY smart people, which might explain why it kind of lacks any social reputation, but it does have some nice events sometimes and like I mentioned there is a lot of things you could do in La Jolla either way.
